Add blog post introducing the new inline execution containers feature (#1132)
OctopusDeploy/blog: blog/2024-04/inline-execution-containers/index.md

---
title: Expanding the use of Execution Containers

> description: Octopus 2024.1 added the ability to an inline Dockerfile or a URL to a Git repository to build the Docker container used for a deployment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Octopus 2024.1 added the ability to use an inline Dockerfile or a URL to a Git repository to build the Docker container used for a deployment.
```

author: henrik.andersson@octopus.com
visibility: public
published: 2024-04-30-1400
metaImage: execution-workers.png
bannerImage: execution-workers.png
bannerImageAlt: Execution Containers for Workers
isFeatured: false
tags: 
  - Product
---

> ![Execution Containers for Workers](execution-workers.png)

Reviewer: I think this will already be shown by the bannerImage at the top level.

Author: Looks like that is true, it was a copy paste from the first blog post on execution containers so I've removed it now

> With the introduction of Execution Containers for steps we have simplified how users deploy applications using Octopus, providing a lightweight and portable solution for bundling dependencies needed in your deployments into Docker containers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the introduction of Execution Containers for steps we simplified how you deploy applications using Octopus, providing a lightweight and portable solution for bundling dependencies needed in your deployments into Docker containers.
```

But, if you can't or don't want to use the container images we provide, managing Dockerfiles and CI pipelines to publish the Docker containers and ensuring smooth deployment workflows can still present challenges. 

> We're excited to announce that we've improved this feature with a couple of new options that aims to simplify this process by offering users the flexibility to choose to use either an inline Dockerfile or a URL to a Git repository to build the Docker container image used for a deployment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We're excited to announce that we've improved this feature with a couple of new options that aim to simplify this process by offering users the flexibility to choose to use either an inline Dockerfile or a URL to a Git repository to build the Docker container image used for a deployment.
```

## The Challenges of using Execution Containers

Before jumping into the new options, let's discuss the challenges faced in creating Docker container images for deploying applications with Execution Containers. 

> To create a Docker container image for use as an Execution Container involves writing a Dockerfile, which specifies the steps needed to build the container image with the necessary dependencies, and a CI/CD pipeline to publish the container image to a registry that Octopus can access (such as DockerHub or Azure Container Registry). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Creating a Docker container image for use as an Execution Container involves writing a Dockerfile. This specifies the steps needed to build the container image with the necessary dependencies, and a CI/CD pipeline to publish the container image to a registry that Octopus can access (such as DockerHub or Azure Container Registry).
```

Any friction in this process can lead to delays in delivering updates and features to end-users.

##  Introducing Inline Execution Containers

To address these challenges, we've introduced new options to this feature that allows users to choose between two methods of creating Execution containers for deployment: 
- using an inline Dockerfile, or 
- providing a URL to a Git repository

### Inline Dockerfile

With the inline Dockerfile option, you can define the container's build instructions within the step. 

![Execution Container from Inline Dockerfile](execution-container-from-inline-dockerfile.png "width=500")

This approach offers simplicity and immediacy, as you can specify the required dependencies and configuration settings without switching between different container images or repositories. 

It's particularly useful for smaller projects or scenarios where the Dockerfile is simple.

### URL to Git Repository

This option allows you to provide a URL to a Git repository containing the Dockerfile and associated resources. 

![Execution Container from Git URL](execution-container-from-git-url.png "width=500")

> This approach offers greater flexibility and scalability, allowing users to leverage existing Dockerfiles maintained within their version control system. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach offers greater flexibility and scalability, allowing you to leverage existing Dockerfiles maintained within their version control system. 
```
